CHAPTER XXV.
I STRIKE THE JOLLY ROGER.
I had scarce gained a position on the bowsprit, when the flying jib flapped and filled upon
the other tack, with a report like a gun.
The schooner trembled to her keel under the reverse, but next moment, the other sails
still drawing, the jib flapped back again and hung idle.
This had nearly tossed me off into the sea, and now I lost no time, crawled back along
the bowsprit, and tumbled head foremost on the deck.
I was on the lee side of the forecastle, and the mainsail, which was still drawing,
concealed from me a certain portion of the afterdeck.
Not a soul was to be seen.
The planks, which had not been swabbed since the mutiny, bore the print of many feet, and
an empty bottle, broken by the neck, tumbled to and fro like a live thing in the scuppers.
Suddenly the Hispaniola came right into the wind.
The jibs behind me cracked aloud, the rudder slammed too, the whole ship gave a sickening
heave and shudder, and at the same moment the main boom swung inboard, the sheet groaning
the blocks, and showed me the lee afterdeck.
There were the two watchmen, sure enough, red cap on his back, as stiff as a hand-spike,
with his arms stretched out like those of a crucifix and his teeth showing through his
open lips, Israel hands propped against the bulwarks, his chin on his chest, his hands
For a while the ship kept bucking and sidling, like a vicious horse, the sails filling, now
on one tack, now on another, and the boom swinging to and fro, till the mast roamed
aloud under the strain.
Now and again, too, there would come a cloud of light sprays over the bulwark, and a heavy
of the ship's bows against the swell.
So much heavier weather was made of it by this great-rigged ship than by my home-made
lopsided coracle, now gone to the bottom of the sea.
At every jump of the schooner red cap slipped to and fro, but what was ghastly to behold,
Neither his attitude nor his fixed-teeth-disclosing grin was anyway disturbed by this rough usage.
At every jump, too, hands appeared still more to sink into himself and settle down upon
the deck, his feet sliding ever the farther out, and the whole body canting towards the
so that his face became, little by little, hid from me, and at last I could see nothing
beyond his ear and the frayed ringlet of one whisker.
At the same time I observed, around both of them, splashes of dark blood upon the planks,
and began to feel sure that they had killed each other in their drunken wrath.
While I was thus looking and wondering in a calm moment, when the ship was still, Israel
hands turned partly round, and with a low moan writhed himself back to the position
in which I had seen him first.
The moan, which told of pain and deadly weakness, and the way in which his jaw hung open, went
right to my heart.
But when I remembered the talk I had overheard from the apple-barrel, all pity left me.
I walked aft until I reached the main mast.
"'Come aboard, Mr. Hands,' I said ironically.
He rolled his eyes round heavily, but he was too far gone to express surprise.
All he could do was to utter one word, "'Brandy!'
It occurred to me there was no time to lose, and dodging the boom as it once more lurched
across the deck, I slipped aft and down the companion stairs into the cabin.
It was such a scene of confusion as you can hardly fancy.
All the lock-fast places had been broken open in the quest of the chart.
The floor was thick with mud where ruffians had sat down to drink or consult after wading
in the marshes round their camp.
The bulkheads, all painted in clear white and beaded round with gilt, bore a pattern
of dirty hands.
Dozens of empty bottles clinked together in corners to the rolling of the ship.
One of the doctor's medical books lay open on the table, half of the leaves gutted out,
I suppose, for pipe-lights.
In the midst of all this the lamp still cast a smoky glow, obscure and brown as umber.
I went into the cellar.
All the barrels were gone, and of the bottles a most surprising number had been drunk out
and thrown away.
Certainly since the mutiny began not a man of them could ever have been sober.
Foraging about I found a bottle with some brandy left for hands, and for myself I routed
out some biscuit, some pickled fruits, a great bunch of raisins, and a piece of cheese.
With these I came on deck, put down my own stock behind the rudder-head, and well out
of the cockswain's reach, went forward to the water-breaker, and had a good deep drink
of water, and then, and not till then, gave hands the brandy.
He must have drunk a gill before he took the bottle from his mouth.
I, said he, by thunder but I wanted some of that.
I had sat down already in my own corner and begun to eat.
Much hurt, I asked him.
He grunted, or rather I might say he barked.
If that doctor was aboard, he said, I'd be right enough on a couple of turns.
But I don't have no manner of luck, you see, and that's what's the matter with me.
As for that swab, he's good and dead he is.
He added indicating the man with the red cap.
He warn't no semen anyhow.
And where might you have come from?
Well, said I, I've come aboard to take possession of this ship, Mr. Hands, and you'll please
regard me as your captain until further notice.
He looked at me sourly enough, but said nothing.
Some of the colour had come back into his cheeks, though he still looked very sick,
and still continued to slip out and settle down as the ship banged about.
By the by, I continued.
I can't have these colours, Mr. Hands, and by your leave I'll strike them, better none
than these.
And again dodging the boom, I ran to the colour lines, handed down the cursed black flag,
and chucked it overboard.
God save the king, said I, waving my cap, and there's an end to Captain Silver.
He watched me keenly and slyly, his chin all the while on his breast.
I reckon, he said at last, I reckon, Captain Hawkins, you'll kind of want to get ashore
now.
Suppose we talks.
Why, yes, says I, with all my heart, Mr. Hands, say on, and I went back to my meal with a
good appetite.
This man, he began, nodding feebly at the corpse.
O'Brien were his name, a rank, irelander.
This man, and me, got the canvas on her, meaning for to sail her back.
Well, he's dead now, he is, as dead as bilge, and who's to sail this ship, I don't see.
Without I gives you a hint.
You ain't that man, as far as I can tell.
Now, look here, you gives me food and drink and an old scarf, or anchorure, to tie my
wound up, you do, and I'll tell you how to sail her, and that's about square all round,
I take it.
I'll tell you one thing, says I, I'm not going back to Captain Kidd's anchorage.
I mean to get into North Inlet and beat her quietly there.
To be sure you did, he cried.
Why, I ain't such an infernal lubber after all, I can see, can't I?
I've tried my fling, I have, and I've lost, and it's you has the wind of me, North Inlet.
Why, I haven't no choice, not I.
I'd help you sail her up to Execution Dock by thunder, so I would.
Well, as it seemed to me, there was some sense in this.
We struck our bargain on the spot.
In three minutes I had the Hispaniola sailing easily before the wind along the coast of
Treasure Island, with good hopes of turning the northern point air noon and beating down
again as far as North Inlet before high water, when we might beach her safely and wait till
the subsiding tide permitted us to land.
Then I lashed the tiller and went below to my own chest, where I got a soft silk handkerchief
of my mother's.
With this and with my aid hands bound up the great bleeding stab he had received in the
thigh, and after he had eaten a little and had a swallow or two more of the brandy he
began to pick up visibly, sat straighter up, spoke louder and clearer, and looked in every
way another man.
The breeze served us admirably.
We skimmed before it like a bird, the coast of the island flashing by and the view changing
every minute.
Soon we were past the highlands and bowling beside low, sandy country, sparsely dotted
with dwarf pines.
And soon we were beyond that again and had turned the corner of the rocky hill that ends
the island on the north.
I was greatly elated with my new command and pleased with the bright sunshiny weather and
these different prospects of the coast.
I had now plenty of water and good things to eat, and my conscience, which had smitten
me hard for my desertion, was quieted by the great conquest I had made.
I should, I think, have had nothing left me to desire but for the eyes of the cockswain
as they followed me derisively about the deck and the odd smile that appeared continually
on his face.
It was a smile that had in it something both of pain and weakness, a haggard old man's
smile.
But there was, besides that, a grain of derision, a shadow of treachery in his expression as
he craftily watched and watched and watched me at my work.
CHAPTER 26
ISRAEL HANDS
The wind, serving us to a desire, now hauled into the west.
We could run so much the easier from the northeast corner of the island to the mouth of the north
inlet.
Only, as we had no power to anchor and dared not beecher till the tide had flowed a good
deal farther, time hung on our hands.
The cockswain told me how to lay the ship too.
After a good many trials I succeeded, and we both sat in silence over another meal.
"'Gap'n!' said he at length, with that same uncomfortable smile.
"'Here's my old shipmate, O'Brien.
Suppose you was to heave him overboard.
I ain't particular as a rule, and I don't take no blame for settling his hash, but I
don't reckon him ornamental now, do you?'
"'I'm not strong enough, and I don't like the job, and there he lies for me,' said I.
"'This here's an unlucky ship, this Hispaniola, Jim,' he went on blinking.
"'There's a power of men been killed in this Hispaniola, a sight a poor seaman dead and
gone since you and me took ship to Bristol.
I never seen such dirty luck, not I.
"'There was this here, O'Brien, now.
He's dead, ain't he?
Well, now, I'm no scholar, and your lattice can read and figure, and to put it straight,
do you take it as dead man is dead for good, or do he come alive again?'
"'You can kill the body, Mr. Hands, but not the spirit.
You must know that already,' I replied.
"'O'Brien there is in another world and may be watching us.'
"'Ah,' says he.
"'Well, that's unfortunate.
Appears as if killing parties was a waste of time.
"'How, some ever.
Spirits don't reckon for much by what I've seen.
I'll chance it with the spirits, Jim.
"'And now you've spoke up free, and I'll take it kind if you'd step down into that there
cabin and get me a—'
"'Well, ah, shiver me timbers.
I can't hit the naimont.
Well, you get me a bottle of wine, Jim.
This here brandy's too strong for my head.'
Now the cockswain's hesitation seemed to be unnatural, and as for the notion of his preferring
wine to brandy, I entirely disbelieved it.
The whole story was a pretext.
He wanted me to leave the deck.
So much was plain.
But with what purpose I could in no way imagine.
His eyes never met mine.
They kept wandering to and fro, up and down, now with a look to the sky, now with a flitting
glance upon the dead O'Brien.
All the time he kept smiling and putting his tongue out in the most guilty, embarrassed
manner, so that a child could have told that he was bent on some deception.
I was prompt with my answer, however, for I saw where my advantage lay, and that with
a fellow so densely stupid I could easily conceal my suspicions to the end.
"'Some wine,' I said.
"'Far better.
Will you have white or red?'
"'Well, I reckon it's about the blessed same to me e-shipmate,' he replied.
"'So it's strong, and plenty of it.
What's the odds?'
"'All right,' I answered.
"'I'll bring you port, Mr. Hans, but I'll have to dig for it.'
With that I scuttled down the companion.
With all the noise I could, slipped off my shoes, ran quietly along the sparred gallery,
mounted the forecastle ladder, and popped my head out of the fore companion.
I knew he would not expect to see me there, yet I took every precaution possible, and
certainly the worst of my suspicions proved too true.
He had risen from his position to his hands and knees, and though his leg obviously hurt
him pretty sharply when he moved, for I could hear him stifle a groan, yet it was at a good
rattling rate that he trailed himself across the deck.
In half a minute he had reached the port's scuppers and picked, out of a coil of rope,
a long knife, or rather a short dirk, discoloured to the hilt with blood.
He looked upon it for a moment, thrusting forth his under-jaw, tried the point upon
his hand, and then, hastily concealing it in the bosom of his jacket, trundled back
again into his old place against the bulwark.
This was all that I required to know.
Israel could move about.
He was now armed, and if he had been at so much trouble to get rid of me, it was plain
that I was meant to be the victim.
What he would do afterwards, whether he would try to crawl right across the island from
north inlet to the camp among the swamps, or whether he would fire long Tom, trusting
that his own comrades might come first to help him, was of course more than I could
say.
Yet I felt sure that I could trust him in one point.
Since, in that our interests jumped together, and that was in the disposition of the schooner,
we both desired to have her stranded safe enough, in a sheltered place, and so that
when the time came she could be got off again with as little labour and danger as might
be.
And until that was done I considered that my life would certainly be spared.
While I was thus turning the business over in my mind, I had not been idle with my body.
I had stolen back to the cabin, slipped once more into my shoes, and laid my hand at random
on a bottle of wine, and now, with this for an excuse, I made my reappearance on the deck.
Hands lay as I had left him, all fallen together in a bundle, and with his eyelids lowered
as though he were too weak to bear the light.
He looked up, however, at my coming, knocked the neck off the bottle like a man who had
done the same thing often, and took a good swig, with his unfortunate toast of here's
luck.
Then he lay quiet for a little, and then, pulling out a stick of tobacco, begged me
to cut him a quid.
Cut me a chunk of that, says he, for I haven't no knife, and hardly strength enough, so be
as I had.
Ah, Jim, Jim, I reckon I've missed stays.
Cut me a quid, as I'll likely be the last lad, for I'm for my long home, and no mistake."
Well, said I, I'll cut you some tobacco, but if I was you and thought myself so badly,
I would go to my prayers like a Christian man.
Why, said he, now you tell me why.
Why, I cried, you are asking me just now about the dead.
You've broken your trust.
You've lived in sin and lies and blood.
There's a man you killed lying at your feet this moment, and you ask me why?
For God's mercy, Mr. Hands, that's why.
I spoke with a little heat, thinking of the bloody dirk he had hidden in his pocket and
designed in his ill thoughts to end me with.
He, for his part, took a great draught of the wine, and spoke with the most unusual
solemnity.
For thirty years, he said, I've sailed the seas, and seen good and bad, better and worse,
fair weather and foul, provisions running out, knives going, and what not.
Well, now I tell you, I never seen good come a goodness yet.
Him as strikes first is my fancy.
Dead men don't bite, that's my views.
Amen, so be it.
And now you look here, he added, suddenly changing his tone.
We've had about enough of this foolery.
The tide's made good enough by now.
You just take my orders, Captain Hawkins, and we'll sail slap in and be done with it.
All told, we had scarce two miles to run, but the navigation was delicate.
The entrance to this northern anchorage was not only narrow and shoal, but lay east and
west, so that the schooner must be nicely handled to be got in.
I think I was a good prompt subaltern, and I am very sure that Hans was an excellent
pilot, for we went about and about and dodged in, shaving the banks with a certainty and
neatness that were a pleasure to behold.
Scarcely had we passed the heads before the land closed around us.
The shores of North Inlet were as thickly wooded as those of the southern anchorage,
but the space was longer and narrower and more like, what in truth it was, the estuary
of a river.
Right before us, at the southern end, we saw the wreck of a ship and the last stages of
dilapidation.
It had been a great vessel of three masts, but had lain so long exposed to the injuries
of the weather that it was hung about with great webs of dripping seaweed, and on the
deck of it shore bushes had taken root and now flourished thick with flowers.
It was a sad sight, but it showed us that the anchorage was calm.
Now, said Hans, look there, there's a pet bit for to beach a ship in, fine flat sand,
never a cat's paw, trees all around of it, and flowers a-blowin' like a guarding on that
old ship.
And once beached, I inquired, how shall we get her off again?
Why, so, he replied.
You take a line ashore, there on the other side, at low water, take a turn about one
of them big pines, bring it back, take a turn around the cap-stand, and lie too for the
tide.
Come high water, all hands take a pull upon the line, and off she comes, as sweet as nature.
And now, boy, you stand by.
We're near the bit now, she's too much way on her, starboard a little, so steady, starboard,
larboard a little, steady, steady.
So he issued his commands, which I breathlessly obeyed, till all of a sudden he cried, Now,
my hearty, luff! and I put the helm hard up, and the Hispaniola swung round rapidly and
stem on for the low wooded shore.
The excitement of these last maneuvers had somewhat interfered with the watch I had kept
hitherto, sharply enough upon the coxswain.
Even then I was still so much interested, waiting for the ship to touch, that I had
quite forgot the peril that hung over my head, and stood craning over the starboard bulwarks,
and watching the ripples spreading wide before the bows.
I might have fallen without a struggle for my life, had not a sudden disquietude seized
upon me and made me turn my head.
Perhaps I had heard a creak, or seen his shadow moving with the tail of my eye.
Perhaps it was an instinct, like a cat's.
But sure enough, when I looked round, there was hands, already half way towards me, with
the dirk in his right hand.
We must both have cried out aloud when our eyes met, but while mine was the shrill cry
of terror, his was a roar of fury like a charging bully's.
At the same instant he threw himself forward, and I leapt sideways towards the bows.
As I did so, I let go of the tiller, which sprang sharp to leeward, and I think this
saved my life, for it struck hands across the chest and stopped him for a moment dead.
Before he could recover I was safe out of the corner where he had me trapped, with all
the deck to dodge about.
Just forward of the main mast I stopped, drew a pistol from my pocket, took a cool aim,
though he had already turned and was once more coming directly after me, and drew the
trigger.
The hammer fell, but there followed neither flash nor sound.
The priming was useless with sea water.
I cursed myself for my neglect.
Why had not I long before reprimed and reloaded my only weapons?
Then I should not have been as now, a mere fleeing sheep before this butcher.
Wounded as he was, it was wonderful how fast he could move.
His grizzled hair tumbling over his face, and his face itself as red as a red ensign
with his haste and fury.
I had no time to try my other pistol, nor indeed much inclination, for I was sure it
would be useless.
One thing I saw plainly, I must not simply retreat before him, or he would speedily hold
me boxed into the bows.
As a moment since he had so nearly boxed me in the stern, once so caught, and nine or
ten inches of the blood-stained dirk would be my last experience on this side of eternity.
I placed my palms against the main mast, which was of a goodish bigness, and waited, each
nerve upon the stretch.
Seeing that I meant to dodge, he also paused, and a moment or two passed in feints on his
part, and corresponding movements upon mine.
It was such a game as I had often played at home about the rocks of Blackhill Cove, but
never before, you may be sure, with such a wildly beating heart as now.
Still, as I say, it was a boy's game, and I thought I could hold my own at it against
an elderly seaman with a wounded thigh.
Indeed my courage had begun to rise so high that I allowed myself a few darting thoughts
on what would be the end of the affair, and while I saw certainly that I could spin it
out for long, I saw no hope of any ultimate escape.
Well, while things stood thus, suddenly the Hispaniola struck, staggered, ground for an
instant in the sand, and then, swift as a blow, canted over to the port side till the
deck stood at an angle of forty-five degrees, and about a punchin' of water splashed into
the scupper holes and lay in a pool between the deck and bulwark.
We were both of us capsized in a second, and both of us rolled almost together into the
scuppers.
The dead red cap with his arms still spread out, tumbling stiffly after us.
So near were we, indeed, that my head came against the cockswain's foot with a crack
that made my teeth rattle.
Low and all, I was the first to foot again, for hands had got involved with the dead body.
The sudden canting of the ship had made the deck no place for running on.
I had to find some new way of escape, and that upon the instant, for my foe was almost
touching me.
Quick as thought I sprang into the mizzen shrouds, rattled up hand over hand, and did
not draw a breath till I was seated on the cross-trees.
I had been saved by being prompt.
The dirk had struck not half a foot below me as I pursued my upward flight, and there
stood Israel hands, with his mouth open and his face upturned to mine, a perfect statue
of surprise and disappointment.
Now that I had a moment to myself I lost no time in changing the priming of my pistol,
and then, having one ready for service, and to make assurance, doubly sure, I proceeded
to draw the load of the other and recharge it afresh from the beginning.
My new employment struck hands all of a heap.
He began to see the dice going against him, and after an obvious hesitation he also hauled
himself heavily into the shrouds, and with the dirk in his teeth began slowly and painfully
to mount.
It cost him no end of time and groans to haul his wounded leg behind him, and I had quietly
finished my arrangements before he was much more than a third of the way up.
Then, with a pistol in either hand, I addressed him.
"'One more step, Mr. Hands,' said I, and I'll blow your brains out.
"'Dead men don't bite, you know,' I added with a chuckle.
He stopped instantly.
I could see by the working of his face that he was trying to think, and the process was
so slow and laborious that in my newfound security I laughed aloud.
At last, with a swallow or two, he spoke, his face still wearing the same expression
of extreme perplexity.
In order to speak he had to take the dagger from his mouth, but in all else he remained
unmoved.
"'Jim,' says he, "'I reckon we're fouled, you and me, and will have to sign articles.
I'd have had you but for that there lurch.
But I don't have no luck, not I, and I reckon I'll have to strike, which comes hard, you
see, for a master mariner to a ship's yunker like you, Jim.'
I was drinking in his words and smiling away, as conceited as a cock upon a wall, when all
in a breath back went his right hand over his shoulder.
Something sang like an arrow through the air.
I felt a blow and then a sharp pang, and there I was, pinned by the shoulder to the mast.
In the horrid pain and surprise of the moment, I scarce can say it was by my own volition,
and I am sure it was without a conscious aim.
Both my pistols went off, and both escaped out of my hands.
They did not fall alone.
With a choked cry, the cockswain loosed his grip upon the shrouds and plunged headfirst
into the water.